---
# US Foreign Policy in the 20th Century

Foriegn policy in the United States throughout the 20th century varied greatly.  From the US not wanting to get involved in the first and second World Wars to the Cold War and many other foreign interests the United States' foreign policy truly had great impacts on the world as a whole.

## Introduction

Foreign policy in the United States has greatly changed over the course of the 20th century.  In the beginning of the book These United States: a Nation in the Making from authors Glenda Elizabeth Gilmore and Thomas J. Sugrue the United States is cautious of the outside world.  As the 20th century moved forward the United States wished to remain out of conflict with Europe but quickly realized that this was impossible when the U.S. entered into World War I and World War II.  Later in the century the United States saw fit to become more involved in foreign affairs through involvement in Korea and Vietnam.  After the Second World War the United states was embroiled in the Cold War which led to involvement in South America, the Middle East and Asia.  Foreign policy changed greatly over the course of the 20th century both in military and economic involvement. 


## The American Empire

The first instance of the United States being involved overseas begins in the late 19th century.  The Spanish-American War began in 1898 in order to look after American interests in the Caribbean.  This war was dubbed as a “splendid little war” by Secretary of State John Hay (Gilmore and Sugrue, 49).  This tells a lot about the mindset of the United States government at the time of the war.  The officials of the United States were clearly seeking to expand their territory and influence while also seeking to expand their capitalist economy.  All of these opportunities would be provided to the United States after the defeat of Spain.  After the war the U.S. occupied the island of Cuba and gained the territories of Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines from the Spanish.  

The Spanish-American war arguably made the United States of America a global empire.  In some ways the American Empire of the 20th century fulfilled the idea of Manifest Destiny that many Americans still believed in.  With an empire the United States found themselves with new complications overseas.  Cuba and the Philippines now fell under the United States’ jurisdiction despite them seeking to be free just as the United States was after defeating the British.  The famous poet Rudyard Kipling wrote a poem in support of the U.S.’s newfound venture into imperialism.

## World at War

For a while the United States attempted to stay out of overseas conflict but eventually were forced to enter into the First World War.  The United States viewed World War I as a European conflict and wished to remain isolationist.  For a while this endeavor was successful until German submarines attacked and sank the ship named the Lusitania which carried many American passengers 128 of which perished in the attack.  Unrestricted German submarine warfare in the Atlantic greatly impacted the American decision to enter into the First World War.  The final straw, however, was a telegram sent from Germany to Mexico.  This telegram, known as the Zimmerman telegram, asked Mexico to join the war on the side of Germany and to attack the United States.  After the telegram was leaked to the public Mexico quickly denied joining the Germans but the telegram seemed to push the United States towards joining the war.  

The period between the World Wars saw the United States return to a more isolationist mindset.  The Great Depression greatly hurt the United States’ worldwide empire that had been established at the beginning of the 20th century.  For apparent reasons the U.S. had to focus more inwardly at this time but there was still a necessity for the United States to interact with foreign nations.  One positive thing that came out of the foriegn policy at this time was the Good Neighbor Policy.  This policy helped to improve relations with the United States’ Southern neighbors in Mexico and Latin America.  For obvious reasons it was beneficial for the United States to improve relations with these countries especially since the Great Depression had crippled the United States economically.  
	After the trying times of the Great Depression the U.S. was once again thrust into an unwanted conflict, another World War.  Once again the United States attempted to remain neutral but were drawn into war because of actions outside of their own.  The sudden attack on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese stunned the United States and pushed them once again to war.  The attack occurred on December 7, 1941 killing many American troops and demolishing the American naval fleet there.  According to the book These United States: A Nation in the Making, “The Japanese used the advantage of surprise to fan out quickly over the Pacific and secure sorely needed rubber and oil resources” (Gilmore and Sugrue, 231).  These events would ultimately backfire for the Axis as the United States quickly mobilized and was prepared for war extremely quickly.
The war between the Axis and the Allies quickly began to heat up.  The United States and its allies invaded Europe on D Day and eventually overthrew the Nazis in Germany.  With the threat of the Nazis eliminated the United States was able to focus on Japan.  They were soon defeated after the United States when they dropped two nuclear bombs on Japan, one on Hiroshima and another on Nagasaki.  The bombing of Japan marked a great change in U.S. foreign policy.  Nuclear weapons would change the world for the rest of the century.


## The Cold War
The Cold War was a subtle war between the United States and Communism.  The United States' policy towards communism was to keep it contained in the East and avoid it spreading further in to Western controlled areas.  Early after the Second World War the U.S. supported the rebels in Greece who favored capitalism over socialism.  As Greece was considered the birthplace of democracy the West felt obligated to keep Greece out of the clutches of communism.  This was one of the earlist examples of the United States supporting the policy of containment.  The next war that the United States would become involved in was the Korean War.

The United States sought to protect South Korea from the communists in North Korea.  The war was known as the forgotten war because of it being seen as unimportant when compared with the exciting and rightous conflict of World War II and the extremely controversial war in Vietnam.  Nonetheless the Korean war was a somewhat successful war in terms of containment.  The United States managed to keep South Korea free and capitalist managing to thrive all the way until the present.

The Vietnam war in contrast to the Korean war was extremely unsuccessful when looking at the policy of containment.  Many Americans disapproved of the Vietnam War seeing it as pointless and imperialistic.  The United States had devolved from empire to world police.  Americans were being sent across the world to fight and die for people who they did not even believe wanted their help.  Eventually the United States' forces were forced to withdraw from Vietnam and the country fell to communsim.

The United States would continue to fight communism although the various hot wars fought during the Cold War began to cool off.  The United States and Russia came to an agreement of Mutually Assured Destruction meaning that if one country launched its nukes the other would retaliate.  This policy spread fear to many Americans but as the Cold War came to a conclusion the people of the US felt safe.  Once the Berlin wall fell and the Soviet Union and its Iron Curtain fell the Cold War was over and the United States stood victorious if one can call it that.  The Cold War significantly impacted the world in a negative way.  Democracy was uprooted in some places in favor of a capitalist dictator.  Many people died and life was often very fragile all because of two conflicting ideals.

## Conclusion
The foriegn policy of the United States in the 20th century helped to shape the world as we know it.  From Amricas expansion at the beginning of the century as they slowly became a global power to the Cold War between the United States and Russia as well as China.  The United States changed the world for better or worse depending on the event.  The U.S. will always be remembered for its actions during this time and how they shaped the world each of us lives in today.  

### Bibliography

Gilmore, Glenda Elizabeth, and Thomas J. Sugrue. These United States: A Nation in the Making. W.W. Norton & Company, 2016.
"Home: Library of Congress." The Library of Congress. https://www.loc.gov/.
"United States Department of State." U.S. Department of State. May 12, 2022. https://www.state.gov/.

